Learning the game of power requires a certain way of looking at the world, a shifting of perspective. It
takes effort and years of practice, for much of the game may not come naturally. Certain basic skills are
required, and once you master these skills you will be able to apply the laws of power more easily.
The most important of these skills, and power’s crucial foundation, is the ability to master your
emotions. An emotional response to a situation is the single greatest barrier to power, a mistake that will
cost you a lot more than any temporary satisfaction you might gain by expressing your feelings. Emotions
cloud reason, and if you cannot see the situation clearly, you cannot prepare for and respond to it with any
degree of control.
Anger is the most destructive of emotional responses, for it clouds your vision the most. It also has a
ripple effect that invariably makes situations less controllable and heightens your enemy’s resolve. If you
are trying to destroy an enemy who has hurt you, far better to keep himoff-guard by feigning friendliness
than showing your anger.
Love and affection are also potentially destructive, in that they blind you to the often self-serving
interests of those whomyou least suspect of playing a power game. You cannot repress anger or love, or
avoid feeling them, and you should not try. But you should be careful about how you express them, and
most important, they should never influence your plans and strategies in any way.
Related to mastering your emotions is the ability to distance yourself fromthe present moment and think
objectively about the past and future. Like Janus, the double-faced Roman deity and guardian of all gates
and doorways, you must be able to look in both directions at once, the better to handle danger from
wherever it comes. Such is the face you must create for yourself-one face looking continuously to the
future and the other to the past.
I thought to myself with what means, with what deceptions, with how many varied arts, with what
industry a man sharpens his wits to deceive another, and through these variations the world is made
more beautiful.
FRANCESCO VETTORI, CONTEMPORARY AND FRIEND OF MACHIAVELLI, EARLY
SIXTEENTH CENTURY
For the future, the motto is, “No days unalert.” Nothing should catch you by surprise because you are
constantly imagining problems before they arise. Instead of spending your time dreaming of your plan’s
happy ending, you must work on calculating every possible permutation and pitfall that might emerge in it.
The further you see, the more steps ahead you plan, the more powerful you become.
The other face of Janus looks constantly to the past—though not to remember past hurts or bear grudges.
That would only curb your power. Half of the game is learning how to forget those events in the past that
eat away at you and cloud your reason. The real purpose of the backward-glancing eye is to educate
yourself constantly—you look at the past to learn fromthose who came before you. (The many historical
examples in this book will greatly help that process.) Then, having looked to the past, you look closer at
hand, to your own actions and those of your friends. This is the most vital school you can learn from,
because it comes frompersonal experience.
There are no principles; there are only events. There is no good and bad, there are only
circumstances. The superior man espouses events and circumstances in order to guide them. If there
were principles and fixed laws, nations would not change them as we change our shirts and a man can
not be expected to be wiser than an entire nation.
HONORÉ DE BALZAC, 1799-1850
You begin by examining the mistakes you have made in the past, the ones that have most grievously held
you back. You analyze themin terms of the 48 laws of power, and you extract fromthema lesson and an
oath: “I shall never repeat such a mistake; I shall never fall into such a trap again.” If you can evaluate and
observe yourself in this way, you can learn to break the patterns of the past—an immensely valuable skill.
Power requires the ability to play with appearances. To this end you must learn to wear many masks
and keep a bag full of deceptive tricks. Deception and masquerade should not be seen as ugly or immoral.
All human interaction requires deception on many levels, and in some ways what separates humans from
animals is our ability to lie and deceive. In Greek myths, in India’s Mahabharata cycle, in the Middle
Eastern epic of Gilga mesh, it is the privilege of the gods to use deceptive arts; a great man, Odysseus for
instance, was judged by his ability to rival the craftiness of the gods, stealing some of their divine power
by matching themin wits and deception. Deception is a developed art of civilization and the most potent
weapon in the game of power.
You cannot succeed at deception unless you take a somewhat distanced approach to yourself—unless
you can be many different people, wearing the mask that the day and the moment require. With such a
flexible approach to all appearances, including your own, you lose a lot of the inward heaviness that
holds people down. Make your face as malleable as the actor’s, work to conceal your intentions from
others, practice luring people into traps. Playing with appearances and mastering arts of deception are
among the aesthetic pleasures of life. They are also key components in the acquisition of power.
If deception is the most potent weapon in your arsenal, then patience in all things is your crucial shield.
Patience will protect you frommaking moronic blunders. Like mastering your emotions, patience is a skill
—it does not come naturally. But nothing about power is natural; power is more godlike than anything in
the natural world. And patience is the supreme virtue of the gods, who have nothing but time. Everything
good will happen—the grass will grow again, if you give it time and see several steps into the future.
Impatience, on the other hand, only makes you look weak. It is a principal impediment to power.
Power is essentially amoral and one of the most important skills to acquire is the ability to see
circumstances rather than good or evil. Power is a game—this cannot be repeated too often—and in
games you do not judge your opponents by their intentions but by the effect of their actions. You measure
their strategy and their power by what you can see and feel. How often are someone’s intentions made the
issue only to cloud and deceive! What does it matter if another player, your friend or rival, intended good
things and had only your interests at heart, if the effects of his action lead to so much ruin and confusion?
It is only natural for people to cover up their actions with all kinds of justifications, always assuming that
they have acted out of goodness. You must learn to inwardly laugh each time you hear this and never get
caught up in gauging someone’s intentions and actions through a set of moral judgments that are really an
excuse for the accumulation of power.
It is a game. Your opponent sits opposite you. Both of you behave as gentlemen or ladies, observing the
rules of the game and taking nothing personally. You play with a strategy and you observe your
opponent’s moves with as much calmness as you can muster. In the end, you will appreciate the politeness
of those you are playing with more than their good and sweet intentions. Train your eye to follow the
results of their moves, the outward circumstances, and do not be distracted by anything else.
Half of your mastery of power comes fromwhat you do not do, what you do not allow yourself to get
dragged into. For this skill you must learn to judge all things by what they cost you. As Nietzsche wrote,
“The value of a thing sometimes lies not in what one attains with it, but in what one pays for it—what it
costs us.” Perhaps you will attain your goal, and a worthy goal at that, but at what price? Apply this
standard to everything, including whether to collaborate with other people or come to their aid. In the end,
life is short, opportunities are few, and you have only so much energy to draw on. And in this sense time
is as important a consideration as any other. Never waste valuable time, or mental peace of mind, on the
affairs of others—that is too high a price to pay.
Power is a social game. To learn and master it, you must develop the ability to study and understand
people. As the great seventeenth-century thinker and courtier Baltasar Gracián wrote: “Many people
spend time studying the properties of animals or herbs; how much more important it would be to study
those of people, with whomwe must live or die!” To be a master player you must also be a master
psychologist. You must recognize motivations and see through the cloud of dust with which people
surround their actions. An understanding of people’s hidden motives is the single greatest piece of
knowledge you can have in acquiring power. It opens up endless possibilities of deception, seduction,
and manipulation.
People are of infinite complexity and you can spend a lifetime watching themwithout ever fully
understanding them. So it is all the more important, then, to begin your education now. In doing so you
must also keep one principle in mind: Never discriminate as to whomyou study and whomyou trust.
Never trust anyone completely and study everyone, including friends and loved ones.
Finally, you must learn always to take the indirect route to power. Disguise your cunning. Like a
billiard ball that caroms several times before it hits its target, your moves must be planned and developed
in the least obvious way. By training yourself to be indirect, you can thrive in the modern court, appearing
the paragon of decency while being the consummate manipulator.
Consider The 48 Laws of Power a kind of handbook on the arts of indirection. The laws are based on the
writings of men and women who have studied and mastered the game of power. These writings span a
period of more than three thousand years and were created in civilizations as disparate as ancient China
and Renaissance Italy; yet they share common threads and themes, together hinting at an essence of power
that has yet to be fully articulated. The 48 laws of power are the distillation of this accumulated wisdom,
gathered fromthe writings of the most illustrious strategists (Sun-tzu, Clausewitz), statesmen (Bismarck,
Talleyrand), courtiers (Castiglione, Gracián), seducers (Ninon de Lenclos, Casanova), and con artists
(“Yellow Kid” Weil) in history.
The laws have a simple premise: Certain actions almost always increase one’s power (the observance
of the law), while others decrease it and even ruin us (the transgression of the law). These transgressions
and observances are illustrated by historical examples. The laws are timeless and definitive.
The 48 Laws of Power can be used in several ways. By reading the book straight through you can learn
about power in general. Although several of the laws may seemnot to pertain directly to your life, in time
you will probably find that all of themhave some application, and that in fact they are interrelated. By
getting an overview of the entire subject you will best be able to evaluate your own past actions and gain
a greater degree of control over your immediate affairs. A thorough reading of the book will inspire
thinking and reevaluation long after you finish it.
The book has also been designed for browsing and for examining the law that seems at that particular
moment most pertinent to you. Say you are experiencing problems with a superior and cannot understand
why your efforts have not lead to more gratitude or a promotion. Several laws specifically address the
master-underling relationship, and you are almost certainly transgressing one of them. By browsing the
initial paragraphs for the 48 laws in the table of contents, you can identify the pertinent law.
Finally, the book can be browsed through and picked apart for entertainment, for an enjoyable ride
through the foibles and great deeds of our predecessors in power. A warning, however, to those who use
the book for this purpose: It might be better to turn back. Power is endlessly seductive and deceptive in its
own way. It is a labyrinth—your mind becomes consumed with solving its infinite problems, and you
soon realize how pleasantly lost you have become. In other words, it becomes most amusing by taking it
seriously. Do not be frivolous with such a critical matter. The gods of power frown on the frivolous; they
give ultimate satisfaction only to those who study and reflect, and punish those who skimthe surfaces
looking for a good time.
Any man who tries to be good all the time is bound to come to ruin among the great number who are
not good. Hence a prince who wants to keep his authority must learn how not to be good, and use that
knowledge, or refrain from using it, as necessity requires.Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV’s finance minister in the first years of his reign, was a generous man who
loved lavish parties, pretty women, and poetry. He also loved money, for he led an extravagant lifestyle.
Fouquet was clever and very much indispensable to the king, so when the prime minister, Jules Mazarin,
died, in 1661, the finance minister expected to be named the successor. Instead, the king decided to
abolish the position. This and other signs made Fouquet suspect that he was falling out of favor, and so he
decided to ingratiate himself with the king by staging the most spectacular party the world had ever seen.
The party’s ostensible purpose would be to commemorate the completion of Fouquet’s château, Vaux-le￾Vicomte, but its real function was to pay tribute to the king, the guest of honor.
The most brilliant nobility of Europe and some of the greatest minds of the time—La Fontaine, La
Rochefoucauld, Madame de Sévigné attended the party. Molière wrote a play for the occasion, in which
he himself was to performat the evening’s conclusion. The party began with a lavish seven-course dinner,
featuring foods fromthe Orient never before tasted in France, as well as new dishes created especially
for the night. The meal was accompanied with music commissioned by Fouquet to honor the king.
After dinner there was a promenade through the château’s gardens. The grounds and fountains of Vaux￾le-Vicomte were to be the inspiration for Versailles.
Fouquet personally accompanied the young king through the geometrically aligned arrangements of
shrubbery and flower beds. Arriving at the gardens’ canals, they witnessed a fireworks display, which
was followed by the performance of Molière’s play. The party ran well into the night and everyone
agreed it was the most amazing affair they had ever attended.
The next day, Fouquet was arrested by the king’s head musketeer, D’Artagnan. Three months later he
went on trial for stealing fromthe country’s treasury. (Actually, most of the stealing he was accused of he
had done on the king’s behalf and with the king’s permission.) Fouquet was found guilty and sent to the
most isolated prison in France, high in the Pyrenees Mountains, where he spent the last twenty years of his
life in solitary confinement.
Interpretation
Louis XIV, the Sun King, was a proud and arrogant man who wanted to be the center of attention at all
times; he could not countenance being outdone in lavishness by anyone, and certainly not his finance
minister. To succeed Fouquet, Louis chose Jean-Baptiste Colbert, a man famous for his parsimony and for
giving the dullest parties in Paris. Colbert made sure that any money liberated fromthe treasury went
straight into Louis’s hands. With the money, Louis built a palace even more magnificent than Fouquet’s—
the glorious palace of Versailles. He used the same architects, decorators, and garden designer. And at
Versailles, Louis hosted parties even more extravagant than the one that cost Fouquet his freedom.
Let us examine the situation. The evening of the party, as Fouquet presented spectacle on spectacle to
Louis, each more magnificent than the one before, he imagined the affair as demonstrating his loyalty and
devotion to the king. Not only did he think the party would put himback in the king’s favor, he thought it
would show his good taste, his connections, and his popularity, making himindispensable to the king and
demonstrating that he would make an excellent prime minister. Instead, however, each new spectacle,
each appreciative smile bestowed by the guests on Fouquet, made it seemto Louis that his own friends
and subjects were more charmed by the finance minister than by the king himself, and that Fouquet was
actually flaunting his wealth and power. Rather than flattering Louis XIV, Fouquet’s elaborate party
offended the king’s vanity. Louis would not admit this to anyone, of course—instead, he found a
convenient excuse to rid himself of a man who had inadvertently made himfeel insecure.
Such is the fate, in some formor other, of all those who unbalance the master’s sense of self, poke
holes in his vanity, or make himdoubt his pre-eminence.During the late sixteenth century, a violent reaction against the Protestant Reformation erupted in Italy.
The Counter-Reformation, as it was called, included its own version of the Inquisition to root out all
deviations fromthe Catholic Church. Among its victims was the scientist Galileo, but an important thinker
who suffered even greater persecution was the Dominican monk and philosopher Tommaso Campanella.
A follower of the materialist doctrine of the Roman philosopher Epicurus, Campanella did not believe
in miracles, or in heaven and hell. The Church had promoted such superstitions, he wrote, to control the
common folk by keeping themin fear. Such ideas verged on atheism, and Campanella expressed them
incautiously. In 1593 the Inquisition threw himinto prison for his heretical beliefs. Six years later, as a
formof partial release, he was confined to a monastery in Naples.
Southern Italy was controlled by Spain at the time, and in Naples Campanella became involved in a
plot to fight and throw out these invaders. His hope was to establish an independent republic based on his
own ideas of utopia. The leaders of the Italian Inquisition, working with their Spanish counterparts, had
himimprisoned again. This time they also tortured him, to discover the true nature of his impious beliefs:
He was subjected to the infamous la veglia, a torture in which he was suspended by his arms in a
squatting position a few inches above a seat studded with spikes. The posture was impossible to sustain,
and in time the victimwould end up sitting on the spikes, which would tear his flesh at the slightest
contact.
During these years, however, Campanella learned something about power. Facing the prospect of
execution for heresy, he changed his strategy: He would not renounce his beliefs, yet he knew he had to
disguise their outward appearance.
To save his life, Campanella feigned madness. He let his inquisitors imagine that his beliefs stemmed
froman incontrollable unsoundness of mind. For a while the tortures continued, to see if his insanity was
faked, but in 1603 his sentence was commuted to life in prison. The first four years of this he spent
chained to a wall in an underground dungeon. Despite such conditions, he continued to write—although no
longer would he be so foolish as to express his ideas directly.
One book of Campanella’s, The Hispanic Monarchy, promoted the idea that Spain had a divine
mission to expand its powers around the world, and offered the Spanish king practical, Machiavelli-type
advice for achieving this. Despite his own interest in Machiavelli, the book in general presented ideas
completely the opposite to his own. The Hispanic Monarchy was in fact a ploy, an attempt to show his
conversion to orthodoxy in the boldest manner possible. It worked: In 1626, six years after its
publication, the pope finally let Campanella out of prison.
Shortly after gaining his freedom, Campanella wrote Atheism Conquered, a book attacking free￾thinkers, Machiavellians, Calvinists, and heretics of all stripes. The book is written in the formof debates
in which heretics express their beliefs and are countered by arguments for the superiority of Catholicism.
Campanella had obviously reformed—his book made that clear. Or did it?
The arguments in the mouths of the heretics had never before been expressed with such verve and
freshness. Pretending to present their side only to knock it down, Campanella actually summarized the
case against Catholicismwith striking passion. When he argued the other side, supposedly his side, on the
other hand, he resorted to stale clichés and convoluted rationales. Brief and eloquent, the heretics’
arguments seemed bold and sincere. The lengthy arguments for Catholicismseemed tiresome and
unconvincing.
Catholics who read the book found it disturbing and ambiguous, but they could not claimit was
heretical, or that Campanella should be returned to prison. His defense of Catholicism, after all, used
arguments they had used themselves. Yet in the years to come, Atheism Conquered became a bible for
atheists, Machiavellians and libertines who used the arguments Campanella had put in their mouths to
defend their dangerous ideas. Combining an outward display of conformity with an expression of his true
beliefs in a way that his sympathizers would understand, Campanella showed that he had learned his
lesson.
Interpretation
In the face of awesome persecution, Campanella devised three strategic moves that saved his hide,
freed himfromprison, and allowed himto continue to express his beliefs. First he feigned madness—the
medieval equivalent of disavowing responsibility for one’s actions, like blaming one’s parents today.
Next he wrote a book that expressed the exact opposite of his own beliefs. Finally, and most brilliantly of
all, he disguised his ideas while insinuating themat the same time. It is an old but powerful trick: You
pretend to disagree with dangerous ideas, but in the course of your disagreement you give those ideas
expression and exposure. You seemto conformto the prevailing orthodoxy, but those who know will
understand the irony involved. You are protected.
It is inevitable in society that certain values and customs lose contact with their original motives and
become oppressive. And there will always be those who rebel against such oppression, harboring ideas
far ahead of their time. As Campanella was forced to realize, however, there is no point in making a
display of your dangerous ideas if they only bring you suffering and persecution. Martyrdomserves no
purpose—better to live on in an oppressive world, even to thrive in it. Meanwhile find a way to express
your ideas subtly for those who understand you. Laying your pearls before swine will only bring you
trouble.
Never combat any man‘s opinion; for though you reached the age of Methuselah, you would never have
done setting him right upon all the absurd things that he believes.
It is also well to avoid correcting people’s mistakes in conversation, however good your intentions
may be; for it is easy to offend people, and difficult, if not impossible to mend them.
If you feel irritated by the absurd remarks of two people whose conversation you happen to overhear,
you should imagine that you are listening to the dialogue of two fools in a comedy. Probatum est.
The man who comes into the world with the notion that he is really going to instruct it in matters of the
highest importance, may thank his stars if he escapes with a whole skin.
ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER, 1788-1860
For a long time I have not said what I believed, nor do I ever believe
what I say, and if indeed sometimes I do happen to tell the truth,
I hide it among so many lies that it is hard to find.
Niccolò Machiavelli, in a letter to Francesco Gnicciardini, May 17, 1521
KEYS TO POWER
We all tell lies and hide our true feelings, for complete free expression is a social impossibility. Froman
early age we learn to conceal our thoughts, telling the prickly and insecure what we know they want to
hear, watching carefully lest we offend them. For most of us this is natural—there are ideas and values
that most people accept, and it is pointless to argue. We believe what we want to, then, but on the outside
we wear a mask.
There are people, however, who see such restraints as an intolerable infringement on their freedom,
and who have a need to prove the superiority of their values and beliefs. In the end, though, their
arguments convince only a few and offend a great deal more. The reason arguments do not work is that
most people hold their ideas and values without thinking about them. There is a strong emotional content
in their beliefs: They really do not want to have to rework their habits of thinking, and when you challenge
them, whether directly through your arguments or indirectly through your behavior, they are hostile.
Wise and clever people learn early on that they can display conventional behavior and mouth
conventional ideas without having to believe in them. The power these people gain fromblending in is
that of being left alone to have the thoughts they want to have, and to express themto the people they want
to express themto, without suffering isolation or ostracism. Once they have established themselves in a
position of power, they can try to convince a wider circle of the correctness of their ideas—perhaps
working indirectly, using Campanella’s strategies of irony and insinuation.
In the late fourteenth century, the Spanish began a massive persecution of the Jews, murdering
thousands and driving others out of the country. Those who remained in Spain were forced to convert. Yet
over the next three hundred years, the Spanish noticed a phenomenon that disturbed them: Many of the
converts lived their outward lives as Catholics, yet somehow managed to retain their Jewish beliefs,
practicing the religion in private. Many of these so-called Marranos (originally a derogatory term, being
the Spanish for “pig”) attained high levels of government office, married into the nobility, and gave every
appearance of Christian piety, only to be discovered late in life as practicing Jews. (The Spanish
Inquisition was specifically commissioned to ferret themout.) Over the years they mastered the art of
dissimulation, displaying crucifixes liberally, giving generous gifts to churches, even occasionally making
anti-Semitic remarks—and all the while maintaining their inner freedomand beliefs.
In society, the Marranos knew, outward appearances are what matter. This remains true today. The
strategy is simple: As Campanella did in writing Atheism Conquered, make a show of blending in, even
going so far as to be the most zealous advocate of the prevailing orthodoxy. If you stick to conventional
appearances in public few will believe you think differently in private.
THE CITIZEN AND THE TRAVELLER
“Look around you,” said the citizen. “This is the largest market in the world.” “Oh surely not,” said
the traveller. “Well, perhaps not the largest,” said the citizen, “but much the best.” “You are certainly
wrong there,” said the traveller. “I can tell you....” They buried the stranger in the dusk.
FABLES, ROBERT Louis STEVENSON, 1850-1894
If Machiavelli had had a prince for disciple, the first thing he would have recommended him to do
would have been to write a book against Machiavellism.
VOLTAIRE, 1694-1778
Do not be so foolish as to imagine that in our own time the old orthodoxies are gone. Jonas Salk, for
instance, thought science had gotten past politics and protocol. And so, in his search for a polio vaccine,
he broke all the rules—going public with a discovery before showing it to the scientific community,
taking credit for the vaccine without acknowledging the scientists who had paved the way, making himself
a star. The public may have loved himbut scientists shunned him. His disrespect for his community’s
orthodoxies left himisolated, and he wasted years trying to heal the breach, and struggling for funding and
cooperation.
Bertolt Brecht underwent a modemformof Inquisition—the House Un-American Activities Committee
—and approached it with considerable canniness. Having worked off and on in the American film
industry during World War II, in 1947 Brecht was summoned to appear before the committee to answer
questions on his suspected Communist sympathies. Other writers called before the committee made a
point of attacking its members, and of acting as belligerently as possible in order to gain sympathy for
themselves. Brecht, on the other hand, who had actually worked steadfastly for the Communist cause,
played the opposite game: He answered questions with ambiguous generalities that defied easy
interpretation. Call it the Campanella strategy. Brecht even wore a suit—a rare event for him-and made a
point of smoking a cigar during the proceedings, knowing that a key committee member had a passion for
cigars. In the end he charmed the committee members, who let himgo scot-free.
Brecht then moved to East Germany, where he encountered a different kind of Inquisition. Here the
Communists were in power, and they criticized his plays as decadent and pessimistic. He did not argue
with them, but made small changes in the performance scripts to shut themup. Meanwhile he managed to
preserve the published texts as written. His outward conformity in both cases gave himthe freedomto
work unhindered, without having to change his thinking. In the end, he made his way safely through
dangerous times in different countries through the use of little dances of orthodoxy, and proved he was
more powerful than the forces of repression.
Not only do people of power avoid the offenses of Pausanias and Salk, they also learn to play the
clever fox and feign the common touch. This has been the ploy of con artists and politicians throughout the
centuries. Leaders like Julius Caesar and Franklin D. Roosevelt have overcome their natural aristocratic
stance to cultivate a familiarity with the common man. They have expressed this familiarity in little
gestures, often symbolic, to show the people that their leaders share popular values, despite their different
status.
The logical extension of this practice is the invaluable ability to be all things to all people. When you
go into society, leave behind your own ideas and values, and put on the mask that is most appropriate for
the group in which you find yourself. Bismarck played this game successfully for years—there were
people who vaguely understood what he was up to, but not clearly enough that it mattered. People will
swallow the bait because it flatters themto believe that you share their ideas. They will not take you as a
hypocrite if you are careful—for how can they accuse you of hypocrisy if you do not let themknow
exactly what you stand for? Nor will they see you as lacking in values. Of course you have values—the
values you share with them, while in their company.
Authority: Do not give dogs what is holy; and do not throw your pearls before swine, lest they trample
themunder foot and turn to attack you. (Jesus Christ, Matthew 7:6)
Image: The Black The herd shuns the Sheep. black sheep, uncertain whether or not it belongs with them.
So it straggles behind, or wanders away fromthe herd, where it is cornered by wolves and promptly
devoured. Stay with the herd—there is safety in numbers. Keep your differences in your thoughts and not
in your fleece.
REVERSAL
The only time it is worth standing out is when you already stand out—when you have achieved an
unshakable position of power, and can display your difference fromothers as a sign of the distance
between you. As president of the United States, Lyndon Johnson would sometimes hold meetings while he
sat on the toilet. Since no one else either could or would claimsuch a “privilege,” Johnson was showing
people that he did not have to observe the protocols and niceties of others. The Roman emperor Caligula
played the same game: He would wear a woman’s negligee, or a bathrobe, to receive important visitors.
He even went so far as to have his horse elected consul. But it backfired, for the people hated Caligula,
and his gestures eventually brought his overthrow. The truth is that even those who attain the heights of
power would be better off at least affecting the common touch, for at some point they may need popular
support.
Finally, there is always a place for the gadfly, the person who successfully defies customand mocks
what has grown lifeless in a culture. Oscar Wilde, for example, achieved considerable social power on
this foundation: He made it clear that he disdained the usual ways of doing things, and when he gave
public readings his audiences not only expected himto insult thembut welcomed it. We notice, however,
that his eccentric role eventually destroyed him. Even had he come to a better end, remember that he
possessed an unusual genius: Without his gift to amuse and delight, his barbs would simply have offended
people.